SOURCE: U.S. Department of Energy, Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) -- "Operations & Maintenance Best Practices Guide, Release 3.0", Chapter 6: Predictive Maintenance Technologies (sections 6.5 Vibration Analysis, 6.6 Motor Analysis)
URL: https://www.energy.gov/sites/prod/files/2020/04/f74/omguide_complete_w-eo-disclaimer.pdf
PUBLISHER: U.S. Department of Energy
LICENSE: U.S. Government publication -- public domain
RETRIEVED: 2026-06-28
NOTE: Minor PDF-extraction kerning artifacts fixed mechanically (e.g. "T urn-to-turn" ->
"Turn-to-turn", "T raining" -> "Training", "differ -ences" -> "differences"); page-footer
strings ("O&M Best Practices Guide, Release 3.0 6.25" etc.) stripped as boilerplate.
No wording added or removed beyond these mechanical fixes.

[SECTION: 6.5 Vibration Analysis -- 6.5.1 Introduction]
As all of us who ride or drive an automobile with some regularity know, certain mechanical faults or problems produce symptoms that can be detected by our sense of feel. Vibrations felt in the steering wheel can be an indicator of an out-of-balance wheel or looseness in the steering linkage. Transmission gear problems can be felt on the shift linkage. Looseness in exhaust system components can sometimes be felt as vibrations in the floorboard. The common thread with all these problems is that degeneration of some mechanical device beyond permissible operational design limitations has manifested itself by the generation of abnormal levels of vibration. The dictionary defines vibration as "a periodic motion of the particles of an elastic body or medium in alternately opposite directions from the position of equilibrium when that equilibrium has been disturbed." The key elements to take away from this definition are vibration is motion, and this motion is cyclic around a position of equilibrium. Many parts of the machine are rotating and each one of these parts is generating its own distinctive pattern and level of vibration. The level and frequency of these vibrations are different and the human touch is not sensitive enough to discern these differences. This is where vibration detection instrumentation and signature analysis software can provide us the necessary sensitivity. Sensors are used to quantify the magnitude of vibration or how rough or smooth the machine is running. This magnitude of vibration is expressed as: Displacement -- the total distance traveled by the vibrating part from one extreme limit of travel to the other (the "peak-to-peak displacement"); Velocity -- a measurement of the speed at which a machine or machine component is moving as it undergoes oscillating motion; Acceleration -- the rate of change of velocity. Various transducers are available that will sense and provide an electrical output reflective of the vibrational displacement, velocity, or acceleration.

[SECTION: 6.6 Motor Analysis -- 6.6.1 Introduction]
When it comes to motor condition analysis, infrared (IR) and vibration will not provide all the answers required to properly characterize motor condition. Motor faults or conditions like winding short-circuits, open coils, improper torque settings, as well as many mechanically-related problems can be diagnosed using motor analysis techniques. Motor analysis equipment remains fairly expensive and proper analysis requires a high degree of skill and knowledge. Currently, more than 20 different types of motor tests exist, depending on how the individual tests are defined and grouped.

[SECTION: 6.6.2.2 Motor Current Signature Analysis]
Another useful tool in the motor predictive maintenance arsenal is motor current signature analysis (MCSA). MCSA provides a non-intrusive method for detecting mechanical and electrical problems in motor-driven rotating equipment. The technology is based on the principle that a conventional electric motor driving a mechanical load acts as a transducer. The motor (acting as a transducer) senses mechanical load variations and converts them into electric current variations that are transmitted along the motor power cables. These current signatures are reflective of a machine's condition and closely resemble signatures produced using vibration monitoring. These current signals are recorded and processed by software to produce a visual representation of the existing frequencies against current amplitude. Analysis of these variations can provide an indication of machine condition, which may be trended over time to provide an early warning of machine deterioration or process alteration. Motor current signature analysis is one of the moderately complex and expensive predictive techniques. The complexity stems in large part from the relatively subjective nature of interpreting the spectra, and the limited number of industry-wide historical or comparative spectra available for specific applications. This type of analysis is typically limited to mission critical applications and/or those with life/health/safety implications.
